.. role:: raw-math(raw)
    :format: latex html
.. _seismicwaves2d_guide:


*******************************************************
Seismic wave propagation -- using ``seismicwaves2d``
*******************************************************

A general form of the elastic wave equation can be derived from the equation of motion and includes momentum and constitutive relationships

.. math::

   \begin{eqnarray}
      \rho\frac{\partial^2 u_i}{\partial t^2}&=\frac{\partial(\sigma_{ij}+M_{ij})}{\partial x_i}+f_i, \\
      \sigma_{ij}&=\lambda\epsilon_{kk}\delta_{ij}+2\mu\epsilon{ij}, \\
      \epsilon_{kl}&=\frac{1}{2}\big(\frac{\partial u_l}{\partial x_k}+\frac{\partial u_k}{\partial x_l}\big),
   \end{eqnarray}
where :math:`u` is the displacement, :math:`\sigma` the stress tensor, :math:`M` the moment tensor :math:`\epsilon` the strain field, :math:`\lambda` and :math:`\mu` the Lame parameters, :math:`f` external forces, :math:`\delta` the Kronecker delta and :math:`i,j,k,l=1,2,3` .

From this relationships, some simplified expressions for specific cases can be derived and in the following we will see the derivation of the acoustic wave equation and the elastic wave equation.

=============================================
Acoustic wave equation in 2D
=============================================

We model acoustic wave propagation through a medium by relating the time and space dependent pressure wavefield :math:`p(\mathbf{x},t)` to some external force :math:`f(\mathbf{x},t)` via the constant density acoustic wave equation. Therefore, we assume a constant density and a vanishing :math:`\mu` and obtain

.. math:: 

   -\frac{1}{c(\mathbf{x})^2}\frac{\partial}{\partial t^2}p(\mathbf{x},t)+\nabla^2 p(\mathbf{x},t)=f(\mathbf{x},t). 

Here, the properties of the medium are parametrized in terms of velocity :math:`c(\mathbf{x},t)`. In 2D, :math:`\mathbf{x}=[x,y]^{\text{T}}` and the spatial derivatives are given by :math:`\nabla=\partial_x(\cdot)+\partial_y(\cdot)`. The acoustic wave equation explicitly shows the relationship between the velocity structure of the medium :math:`[c(\mathbf{x},t)]` and the pressure wavefield :math:`p(\mathbf{x},t)` generated by crompressional waves. Hence it describes the forward problem of simulating the propagation of acoustic waves in a medium, hence solving this equation means that we are interested in obtaining the pressure wavefield given a specific velocity model.

In tomography, one is interested in unraveling the properties of the medium from some measurements of the wavefield, hence going in the reverse direction of the forward equation. Here we ask the question: given some measurements of the time dependent pressure wavefield, what is the velocity structure of the medium? One simple and frequently applied method that allows us to relate our observations to the velocity of the medium is straight-ray tomography. As the name suggests, the fundamental assumption in straight-ray tomography is that waves can be modelled as rays of infinite frequency and that they propagate along straight lines from a source to a receiver. Introducing the slowness as :math:`s=c^{-1}`, the observed travel time :math:`t_i`- hence the first arrival of the wave in the seismogram - between a source and a receiver can now be related to the structure of the medium by the line integral 

.. math::

   t_i=\int_S^Rs(l)dl,

where :math:`t_i` is the travel time measured at receiver :math:`R`, :math:`S` is the source position and :math:`s(l)` the slowness along the straight path from the source to the receiver. Note that by defining the slowness as the inverse of the velocity of the medium, this integral equation is linear. 

In practice, one needs to solve the discrete version of the travel time line integral. To this end, a computational model of the domain of interest is constructed by subdividing the domain in a rectilinear grid where the slowness :math:`s_j` within each cell :math:`j` is constant. Using the straight-ray approximation a ray then propagates as a straight line from an source :math:`S` to a receiver :math:`R` through the gridded domain, covering a certain distance :math:`r_j` within a cell :math:`j`. The time-of-flight of an entire ray :math:`i` between two points is given by the line connecting them and is calculated by the sum of the cell segments over the corresponding slowness within the cell as

.. math::

   t_i=\sum_jr_js_j.

Given a discretized velocity model of the medium, we can now trace out the straight-ray paths linking a source and a receiver by solving this equation.


=============================================
Elastic wave equation in 2D
=============================================

The elastic wave equation describes the propagation of waves in an isotropic homogeneous elastic medium. Generally we are interested in obtaining the velocity vector :math:`\mathbf{v}`, consisting of the component of the velocity in each spatial direction. Noting that a component of the velocity vector is given by :math:`v_i=\frac{\partial u_i}{\partial t}` and inserting this into the elastic wave equation, one obtains the velocity-stress formulation for an isotropic medium as

.. math::

   \begin{eqnarray}
      \rho\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial t}&=\frac{\partial(\sigma_{ij}+M_{ij})}{\partial x_j}+f_i, \\
      \frac{\partial \sigma_{ij}}{\partial t}&=\lambda\frac{\partial \epsilon_{kk}}{\partial t}\delta_{ij}+2\mu\frac{\partial\epsilon_{ij}}{\partial t}, \\
      \frac{\partial \epsilon_{ij}}{\partial t}&=\frac{1}{2}\big(\frac{\partial v_j}{\partial x_i}+\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_j}\big).
   \end{eqnarray}

Note that reformulating the elastic wave equation in terms of velocity instead of displacement reduces the 2nd order derivative with respect to time to a 1st order derivative. 
  



=============================================
API ``seismicwaves2d``, list of functions
=============================================

.. automodule:: pestoseis.seismicwaves2d
   :members:
   :imported-members:  
..   :undoc-members:
